---
title: "Sometimes open source maintainers do owe you something"
tags: ["open source", "responsibility"]
date: 2021-08-30T15:12:41Z
draft: false
---

Open source maintainers [owe you nothing](https://mikemcquaid.com/2018/03/19/open-source-maintainers-owe-you-nothing/). Being a maintainer is hard work and often thankless. Despite maintainers often being volunteers, they sometimes feel obliged to provide unpaid support for their projects --- I certainly do --- and some users begin to feel entitled to maintainers' time. Some users submit feature requests and expect the maintainers to implement what they want. This is wrong. And yet I do think there are some cases when open source maintainers *do* owe their users something.

I'm an open source maintainer --- albeit of [relatively small projects](https://github.com/milesmcc) --- and my most common response to new feature requests is something along the lines of "Hey! Thanks for submitting this feature request. I think it'd be a great addition to the project, but I don't have the bandwidth right now to implement it myself. You or anyone else is welcome to submit a pull request adding it. Thanks!" People understand, and often contribute the change themselves.

When someone submits a bug report and the issue isn't showstopping, I'll sometimes leave the issue open and provide a similar response. I have family and friends to prioritize; I have a job to prioritize; I have school to prioritize. I care deeply about the wellbeing of my projects, and I want the people using them to have a good experience. But I don't *owe* those projects --- or the people using them --- anything.

But I do think there's a type of open source project where these refrains don't apply: officially-maintained corporate open source "clients" for proprietary products. These projects include the official [Stripe Python client](https://github.com/stripe/stripe-python) (which you must be a Stripe customer to use) and the Google-maintained [BigQuery components](https://github.com/apache/beam/tree/master/sdks/python/apache_beam/io/gcp) of the BEAM open source project (which is only useful to Google Cloud customers), to give just two examples. These projects are open source "wrappers" that make it possible for you to integrate proprietary products (that *you* pay for!) into your application.

If you use these open source projects, the maintainers *do* actually owe you something: To use these projects, you must be a customer of the companies that maintain them, and these projects are *part* of those companies' product offerings. If you run into an issue, it's on the company to fix it --- not you.

### A clear case: Stripe's Python client library

Let's take a look at the Stripe Python client library. [Stripe](https://stripe.com) is a company that makes processing online payments simple. In exchange for their payment processing, Stripe takes a small percentage of every transaction. Stripe --- as great a company as they may be --- doesn't maintain their Python client library for free. They maintain their Python client library because it's part of their product! While Stripe's customers don't pay for access to the client library specifically, they do pay Stripe to make processing online payments easier, and having a well-maintained Python client library is an important part of Stripe's product offering.

Now imagine something broke in the Stripe Python client library, and you submitted a bug report. It would be wholly inappropriate for Stripe to respond by saying "Hey, we don't have the bandwidth to fix this right now, but you're welcome to submit a pull request and fix this yourself." Excuse me? By submitting an issue, you're already providing your work to Stripe for free. (Perhaps their quality assurance team should have caught the issue!) By submitting a pull request, you would be essentially improving their product for them. Stripe could respond by saying that the issue isn't a priority, but it's certainly not *your responsibility* to fix their bugs.

Fortunately, this isn't what Stripe does. They are incredibly responsive and work with users to resolve issues (even when those [issues](https://github.com/stripe/stripe-python/issues/716) aren't necessarily with the Stripe client itself). They don't respond to feature requests by saying that they'd accept a pull request making the change. They understand that unlike, say, the Python maintainers, they do owe their users something. After all, the Stripe Python client library just an open source wrapper for their core, proprietary offering. Triaging, responding, and supporting the users of their open source library is another form of product support.

### Let's not get ahead of ourselves

I don't think that *all* corporate open source maintainers owe something to their users, though. I'm only talking about open source *wrappers* for proprietary products. Take Microsoft's [VSCode](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode), for example. It's a fantastic piece of software. I'm writing this blog post in VSCode right now. And neither Microsoft nor the VSCode maintainers --- who are employed by Microsoft --- owe me anything. I don't pay to use VSCode. I'm not Microsoft's customer (at least not when it comes to VSCode). If I find an issue or have a feature request, it would be perfectly reasonable for them to respond by saying that it's not a priority but that they'd accept a pull request.

Sure, VSCode is a product offering by Microsoft, and my contribution to VSCode might ultimately help Microsoft. (After all, they are using it as the foundation of their [GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) feature.) But that's ok. On an individual basis, Microsoft owes me nothing. By telling me that a feature request isn't a priority and suggesting I submit a pull request, they aren't abdicating responsibility or wrongly shifting the burden of maintenance to me. VSCode isn't an open source wrapper for a proprietary product, and I'm not Microsoft's customer. They can ignore me as they please!

Sure, perhaps Microsoft is shifting the burden of maintainence to the community by releasing VSCode as open source. But in return, the community gets a fantastic editor for free. The ethics here are nuanced, and perhaps out of the scope of this post. (Though all things considered, I think it's "better" that VSCode be open source than proprietary.) It's not wrong for the VSCode maintainers to ignore certain issues or encourage community pull requests. Like the maintainers of a truly volunteer open source project (like [Vue](https://github.com/vuejs/vue)), the VSCode maintainers owe you nothing.

### A less clear case: BigQuery in BEAM

Now let's talk about [Apache Beam](https://beam.apache.org/). Beam is an open source project that provides "an advanced unified programming model" for writing "batch and streaming data processing jobs that run on any execution engine." It was originally developed by Google, and it powers their proprietary [Dataflow](https://cloud.google.com/dataflow) product. Inside Apache Beam are official components maintained by Google for interfacing with BigQuery, another proprietary Google offering. BigQuery is a great product! I use it all the time for work, and have had a fantastic experience with it.

But last month, I filed a Beam bug report for a pretty [showstopping issue](https://issues.apache.org/jira/projects/BEAM/issues/BEAM-12659?filter=allissues&orderby=created+DESC%2C+priority+DESC%2C+updated+DESC) in Beam's BigQuery integration (which, as far as I can tell, is officially maintained by Google). The gist of it is that when you're using the native Python Beam implementation, you can't upload data to BigQuery in large batches --- you can only stream it, which is significantly slower than batch uploading. While it's still mostly _useable_ (streaming the data into BigQuery instead of uploading it in one big batch works well enough), the issue makes uploading some large datasets prohibitively slow.

As of August 30th, the issue I filed has been neither acknowledged or trigaged. That's totally understandable! I get that fixing bugs can take time, even on the most well-resourced open source projects. And I understand that the Beam maintainers have a lot to deal with. But I don't think that the usually-true adage that "open source maintainers owe you nothing" applies here. This code is---as far as I can tell---officially maintained by Google, and it is useful only insofar as it lets Google Cloud customers integrate with BigQuery, another Google product. Google has a responsibility to make this work.

If this issue goes unresolved for a long period of time, **my employer might pay me to fix the issue myself and contribute the change upstream**. That doesn't sit well with me. We pay Google a lot of money to use their products, and having to fix bugs in those products ourselves isn't what we signed up for. While I'm lucky that my employer encourages contributing fixes and improvements to the open source projects we use, those projects are essentially always maintained by volunteers. I don't think it's our responsibility to fix the BigQuery integration in Beam.

Some of the Beam maintainers are volunteers, to be clear, and I don't think the responsibility to fix this issue falls on them either. Google contributed the BigQuery code to Beam as part of their Dataflow and BigQuery products, so the maintenance burden for those contributions falls to Google. This raises a broader question, which is whether Google transferred Beam to Apache to outsource the maintenance burden to, as a friend of mine put it, "a community made of volunteers who don't owe you anything." But that's a topic for another post.

### What can you really do?

So what can you do when you're running into an issue with an officially-maintained corporate open source "clients" for proprietary products? You can hope that the company will notice your issue and fix it themselves, or you can give in and contribute a fix yourself. Or you can vote with your wallet and move to a different provider --- though this often isn't practical.

I just don't want the refrain that "open source maintainers owe you nothing" to be co-opted in support of large, well-resourced corporations shifting the maintenance burdens of their products to their customers. It's not that helping large corporations (or small companies) directly or indirectly is somehow wrong, and I have nothing against proprietary software. If you want to go ahead and submit a pull request to the Stripe Python client library or to the BigQuery integration in Beam, go ahead --- that's your choice! What matters to me is that we don't confuse volunteer open source maintainers (who owe you nothing) with companies maintaining open source client libraries for their proprietary products. Because if you're a customer, they absolutely do owe you something.